---
jupytext:
  formats: md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(Guide-Molecular-Visualization)=
# Molecular visualization using VMD
Beyond allowing the user to run computational chemistry calculations, the SPyCCI package also provides a simple interface to the [Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) software](https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/) enabling the user to render molecular structures and cube files directly from a python script. The interface is constantly updated with new features and, at the moment, supports the rendering of both molecular structures, provided either in the form of `System` objects, `.xyz` or `pdb` files, and volumetric data in the form of `.cube` files or `Cube` objects.

The core of the interface is represented by the `VMDRenderer` class. The class represents a generic rendering tool that can be created setting a resolution value, system position, orientation and zoom, graphical effects such as shadows, ambientocclusion and depth of field (DoF). Once created the class provides specific methods capable of generating the required renders.

:::{admonition} Notes about cube files
:class: info
The `.cube` format processed by SPyCCI is the [Gaussian cube file format](https://paulbourke.net/dataformats/cube/). The file is composed by a header and a body of volumetric data. The header is structured as:
- Two comment lines.
- A line listing the number of atoms included in the file followed by the position of the origin of the volumetric data.
- Three lines listing the number of voxels along each axis (`x`, `y`, `z`) followed by the axis vector. The length of each vector is the length of the side of the voxel thus allowing non cubic volumes. If the sign of the number of voxels in a dimension is positive then the units are Bohr, if negative then Angstroms.
- A section with a number of lines equal to the number of atoms in the molecule and consisting of 5 numbers: the first is the atom number, the second is the charge (this field is often used for other data types), and the last three are the `x`, `y`, `z` coordinates of the atom center.

The body of volumetric data is represented by a series of lines listing floating point values for each voxel. The data is usually arranged in columns of 6 values generated by looping on the voxel coordinates with `x` axis as the outer loop and `z` as the most inner one.
:::


<h4> Rendering a molecule from a <code>.xyz</code> file </h4>

The structure of a molecule can be rendered starting from a `.xyz` file by using the `render_system_file()` function. As an example, the following script can be used to render a simple `water.xyz` file:

```python
from spycci.tools.vmdtools import VMDRenderer

vmd = VMDRenderer(resolution=1200)
vmd.render_system_file("./water.xyz")
```

This will save a `water.bmp` image file that looks like this:

```{image} ./images/water.bmp
:alt: water.bmp
:width: 300px
:align: center
```

<h4> Rendering a molecule from a <code>System</code> object </h4>

Similarly from what shown in the case of a `.xyz` file, the `VMDRenderer` class directly supports the rendering of `System` objects. This can be done using the `render_system()` function. As an example, the following script can be used to render a benzene molecule generated from its SMILES string:

```python
from spycci.systems import System
from spycci.tools.vmdtools import VMDRenderer

mol = System.from_smiles("benzene", "c1ccccc1")

renderer = VMDRenderer(resolution=1200)
renderer.scale = 1.5
renderer.xyx_rotation = [-45., 0., 0.]

renderer.render_system(mol)
```

Please notice how the `scale` argument has been set to `1.5` to zoom while a rotation of 45° has been applied to the `x` axis. The output of such a script is a `benzene_0_1.bmp` file:

```{image} ./images/benzene_0_1.bmp
:alt: benzene_0_1.bmp
:width: 400px
:align: center
```

<h4> Rendering a generic <code>.cube</code> file </h4>

Rendering of a generic cube file can be achieved using the `render_cube_file()` function of the `VMDRenderer` class. The function, that can be called by simply providing the name of the cube file, can be set to render positive and negative regions of volumetric data with a user specified `isovalue`. If the isovalue is not explicilty indicated a default value will be computed as the 20% of the maximum voxel value (in absolute values). Additional features such as the color of the positive and negative reagions, whether to show the negative part of the cube or the filename of the output file, can be set by the user using the built in keywords.

As an example, the 6th molecular orbital for the formaldehyde molecule, generated by orca as a `input.mo6a.cube` file. Can be simply rendered using the code:

```python
from spycci.tools.vmdtools import VMDRenderer

renderer = VMDRenderer(resolution=1200)
renderer.scale = 1.0
renderer.xyx_rotation = [120.0, 20.0, 0.0]

renderer.render_cube_file(
    f"./input.mo6a.cube",
    positive_color=32,
    negative_color=23,
    show_negative=True,
)
```

resulting in the following `input.mo6a.bmp` image file:

```{image} ./images/input.mo6a.bmp
:alt: input.mo6a.bmp
:width: 450px
:align: center
```

:::{admonition} Notes about ORCA's molecular orbitals (MOs) cube files
:class: warning
The cube files generated by ORCA when exporting molecular orbitals differs from the standard structure of the Gaussian cube file format. The number of atoms is represented by a negative number and an additional line is added after the atoms coordinates section. The differences in formatting are taken into account by SPyCCI that automatically converts this format to a regular Gaussian cube for visualization with `vmd`.
:::

<h4> Rendering volumetric data from a <code>Cube</code> object </h4>

Similarly from what shown in the case of a `.cube` file, the `VMDRenderer` class directly supports the rendering of `Cube` objects. This can be done using the `render_cube()` function in complete analogy with the syntax discussed before for the `render_cube_file()` function. The only difference in this case is the requirement for the user to provide a filename since, differently from what seen in the case of a `System` object, a `Cube` object has not assigned name.

As an example, the previous example about plotting the 6th molecular orbital of the formaldehyde molecule from a `input.mo6a.cube` cube file can be revritten as follows:

```python
from spycci.tools.cubetools import Cube
from spycci.tools.vmdtools import VMDRenderer

renderer = VMDRenderer(resolution=400)
renderer.scale = 1.0
renderer.xyx_rotation = [120.0, 20.0, 0.0]

cube = Cube.from_file("./input.mo6a.cube")

renderer.render_cube(
    cube,
    f"./formaldehyde_MO6a.bmp",
    positive_color=32,
    negative_color=23,
    show_negative=True,
)
```

This will generate a `formaldehyde_MO6a.bmp` file identical to the one shown in the previous example.

<h4> Rendering an ORCA spin density (<code>.spindens.cube</code>) file </h4>

A spin density cube generated from orca (having the `.spindens.cube` extension) can be rendered using the dedicated `render_spin_density_cube()` function. In the following simple example, the spin density obtained form a DFT calculation has been saved and directly rendered from the `output_densities` folder:

```python
from spycci.systems import System
from spycci.engines.orca import OrcaInput
from spycci.tools.vmdtools import VMDRenderer

mol = System.from_smiles("benzene", "c1ccccc1", charge=1, spin=2)

orca = OrcaInput(method="B3LYP", basis_set="def2-TZVP", ncores=4)
orca.spe(mol, save_cubes=True, inplace=True)

renderer = VMDRenderer(resolution=1200)
renderer.scale = 1.5
renderer.xyx_rotation = [-45.0, 0.0, 0.0]

renderer.render_spin_density_cube(
    "./output_densities/benzene_1_2_orca_B3LYP_def2-TZVP_vacuum_spe.spindens.cube",
    filename="spindensity.bmp"
)
```

The result is a `spindensity.bmp` (the name of the output has been manually set using the `filename` option):

```{image} ./images/spindensity.bmp
:alt: spindensity.bmp
:width: 450px
:align: center
```

<h4> Rendering an Fukui functions (<code>.fukui.cube</code>) file </h4>

Volumetric maps of Fukui functions generated from the SPyCCI `calculate_fukui()` function, and saved in cube format (having the `.fukui.cube` extension), can be rendered using the dedicated `render_fukui_cube()` function. In the following simple example, the Fukui $f^+(r)$ function obtained form a DFT calculation on the propionaldehyde molecule has been saved and directly rendered from the `output_densities` folder:

```python
from spycci.systems import System
rom spycci.engines.xtb import XtbInput
from spycci.engines.orca import OrcaInput
from spycci.functions.fukui import calculate_fukui, CubeGrids

from spycci.tools.vmdtools import VMDRenderer

mol = System.from_smiles("propionaldehyde", "CCC=O")
xtb = XtbInput()

xtb.opt(mol)

orca = OrcaInput(method="PBE", basis_set="def2-SVP", ncores=4)
calculate_fukui(mol, orca, cube_grid=CubeGrids.FINE)

renderer = VMDRenderer(resolution=1200)
renderer.scale = 1.4
renderer.xyx_rotation = [-100.0, 180.0, 90.0]

renderer.render_fukui_cube(
    "./output_densities/propionaldehyde_orca_PBE_def2-SVP_vacuum_Fukui_plus.fukui.cube",
    isovalue=0.01,
    show_negative=True,
    filename="fukui_plus.bmp",
)
```

The output of the renderer call is a `fukui_plus.bmp` image file:

```{image} ./images/fukui_plus.bmp
:alt: fukui_plus.bmp
:width: 450px
:align: center
```

Similarly condensed Fukui values, saved in the charge column of the `.fukui.cube` file, can be rendered using the `render_condensed_fukui()` function according to the syntax:

```python
renderer.render_condensed_fukui(
    "./output_densities/propionaldehyde_orca_PBE_def2-SVP_vacuum_Fukui_plus.fukui.cube",
    filename="condensed_fukui_plus.bmp",
)
```
that outputs the following `condensed_fukui_plus.bmp` image file:

```{image} ./images/condensed_fukui_plus.bmp
:alt: condensed_fukui_plus.bmp
:width: 450px
:align: center
```